Wonder whether collaboration ever succeeds, but whether it ever happens.
My apologies, I forgot to turn on the recorder. This is the OGM Weekly Call.
On Thursday, September 11th, 9-11, 2025. Go ahead, Gil.
So, to Scott's provocation of… I remember it as him wondering whether collaboration ever happens, not whether it ever succeeds, and it seems to me fairly obvious that it happens all the time and always has.
Whether it succeeds is a good question.
Well, I was puzzled by what… by his definite… by his definition of collaboration. He seemed… He seemed perhaps to be holding the word in a different way than I'm holding it, and maybe others of us are holding it, and I was really curious.
Could you tell us both of those ways?
What he meant by it. I don't want to speak for him. I was trying to channel him when I wrote the invite.
Yeah.
But I'm not sure. Kevin, please.
Yeah, I talked to him about it, uh, because we're starting to do something together with John Warner related to Plex, and his definition of collaboration is.
When two different groups with their own goals collaborate on something.
Uh, that doesn't divert them from. What they're doing.
Hmm.
Man, I said, well, you know, I'm working on. Affordable housing in Suwanoa, and I've got, like, 5 different groups working on that one thing.
From different perspectives. Oh, one is getting a… Got a grant from Gates for a third place, because we don't have any.
Place people can gather anymore. There's no supermarket, there's no restaurant, there's no post office, there's no fire. There's no, uh, hard rush, you know, there's nothing, uh, where people can gather. So a third place as a place to.
Then work on housing, and so there's lots of different groups working on that problem.
He said, no, what I mean is groups that are. Having their own goals and finding a way to bridge that. And I said, yeah, I've never… I've always… I've done that a lot.
And you get, you know, Barney, I'm like you, you like me, but nobody changes from their own goals. Occasionally, it's like.
You have ships going by, and you can lower a drawbridge from each ship to the other, and you get a little bit across, but nobody.
You know, if they've got a goal going that way, and you've got a goal going that way, it does… to me, it doesn't happen.
But that's what he was thinking that. Groups with their own purpose would collaborate on something between them in some way, and uh…
I just have not ever seen it. The way he's talking about it.
And look…
So it sounds like a pretty… a pretty narrow definition of collaboration. It's, uh… Groups with cross missions or something like that.
Um, I'm reminded, I think I told this story on an OGM call long ago, but in Management 101.
Uh, we had the ugly Oranges negotiation case. And the class is divided in two, uh, each… each half got the case, and basically the situation is.
There is a shipment of the last available ugly oranges on the planet. They are unique oranges, special characteristics.
And you need to buy the shipment of oranges. You have a $1 million budget, no more, no more than a million dollars. You have to buy the shipment.
There's another group that you know is coming, competing, because they also want to buy the oranges, so you gotta figure out, you need… you need the pith of the peel to make a serum that's going to cure cancer.
Um, and I'm gonna completely spoil the plot. The other team needs the juice of the oranges.
And it's up to the negotiation to figure out… they could pay a buck for the shipment and spend $999,999 on research.
Um, and just split the oranges, because they don't need the same thing from the oranges.
Um, so it was really enlightening, because it made you investigate any negotiation and go, what the heck is it that we want or need?
It's a very nice, memorable case to illustrate, like. Sometimes people that look like they're in great contention, because the negotiation typically gets really contentious really fast, because they both think they need all of.
The oranges. Anyway, back on…
Out of curiosity, was the juice for something spectacular, like curing cancer, or was it just to quench my thirst?
No, I think it's… I think it's always like curing cancer, or some… some big, noble goal. You know, that's part of it. And I think the… I'll look it up in my brain. I'm pretty sure the Ugly Oranges cases chronicled online.
And very, very findable, so I'll put a link to it in a sec.
Um, but off to you, Mike.
I was intrigued by his question, too, and confused. Um, I thought the focus was more on.
Individuals collaborating, or small groups. In different organizations collaborating, so… so maybe, maybe what Kevin said and what I'm thinking are consistent.
But, um, the skepticism I heard was. At the end of the day.
Somebody kind of makes… critical decisions about what goes forward.
And… and so it… the idea of some… melding of the minds, and this new organism is now doing things that could not be done individually.
That we sometimes talk about. Uh… is something we probably should be skeptical about. I've heard so many cases where.
You know, 5 people go, oh, let's all collaborate on this. In the end.
One person does 80% of the work, and 4 people take all the credit, you know, and actually, some of those 4 people are actually getting in the way, and making.
Silly suggestions, and delaying the process. So, I think in the end, you need to champion… oh, here's Scott, he can describe what's going on.
I'm good.
But the fact that… that… we should all be skeptical of collaboration for collaboration's sake.
And we should all understand that at the end of the day.
Different people need to take on different responsibilities, and most likely.
The most important thing you get is a deadline, and somebody who has a real motivation to get it done.
Because otherwise, collaborations can wander and wander and wander, and as.
As Kevin said. Different groups can push it in different directions, and…
Avoid consensus. But Scott, we're debating your thesis. Without you here. I'm glad you're here.
Yes.
I'm sorry I'm late, um, as you probably all have guessed, I'm… I'm usually working while I'm doing these calls, so… so I, you know, I've managed to.
Yep. Yep.
Get off the other stuff for a moment to come and talk with you about.
My odd thoughts about collaboration. Um… So the meme that I pulled up is Inigo Montoya, you keep using that word.
I don't think that means what you think that means. And that's been a theme of mine, is when I hear, especially in organizational culture.
I hear a lot of words that I think. What does that mean? Well, we need to communicate. You know, it's like, okay, well, let's talk about what that means. So, for me, collaboration.
What I started to notice. Was that it seemed to be used synonymously with, let's get together and work.
And actually, the root of it was… work together. Collaboration is from the Latin two words that mean work together, and I thought.
Ostensibly, that means anytime two or more people are doing something, that means it's collaboration.
And I thought, I don't think that's how we're using it.
Like, I don't… I don't think that when I say I want to collaborate with someone.
That that just means you and I are going to work on something.
Together. And the best example that I came up with in the last 24 hours was a restaurant.
I consider… The head chef and the restaurateur.
To have a collaboration. In developing the restaurant and the menu.
And the experience. I do not consider.
The kitchen, day to day, where they are executing the recipes that have already been created.
To be a collaborative environment. I consider that teamwork.
Everyone has a role, there's a set plan, and I know that we love our distinctions, right?
So, I'm throwing this out as a hypothesis. That there's a difference between collaboration and teamwork.
And I've been thinking one of the ways I can get to it is the idea of A collaboration. Collaboration as a noun.
Which, to me, is an end result. Created by… unique individuals.
Pairing up or grouping up. And that if you change the individuals, you fundamentally change the collaboration.
Which is not true with teamwork. We can take one person out, put another person in, and the role, if they're doing the same role, is a bucket brigade.
And we absolutely need teamwork. Someone's in charge, someone sets the vision, and we…
We all fulfill our role. With a collaboration, we typically. Name the individuals, name the organizations, because they are unique.
And if you take one out. And put another one in, it's a different thing. So my thought…
Is, I have rarely seen. And I'll be done in just a second here.
I've rarely seen. What I consider true collaboration, which is a couple of minds getting together.
With a shared vision, who creates something that they couldn't create separately.
Not because of… manpower, but because…
Of the unique interaction of those two individuals. I think we talk about collaboration, but we really are saying teamwork.
But my observation has been that most of the time it's one person's vision.
And other people are getting on board. As opposed to two people coming together and saying.
We're making something that we both. Have the same vision on.
And my test has been… If the people who are collaborating can't say what they're doing in the same way.
So, um… Scott, thank you very much for deepening that.
Maybe they're not actually collaborating. So…
So I think, from what you just said, that the Hollywood movie-making mechanism, where a bunch of people come together, one of whom is the gaffer and the best boy and the grip and all that.
That that is teamwork, but not collaboration, because each of those people have an assigned role, they all know exactly what that role is, and they are plug-and-playable.
Is that right? However. However, if the director is Mike Lee.
That is… that is correct.
Who relies on his collaboration with the actors to invent the script as they come together into their roles.
I agree with that, because if you had a different actor.
That is collaboration.
It would be a different… they would bring something different to it.
Yes, and Mike, this is Mike Lee's particular M.O, his unique M.O.
In movie making, and there's maybe a couple other directors that do this, but he relies on it completely.
Um, and I think that it lives up to the spirit of collaboration that you're pointing to.
I agree with that, and I think when you are coming into a collaborative.
Um, Gil.
When someone's at the… the reason I brought this up to begin with.
Mm-hmm.
Is I believe when people are asking for collaboration. I don't think that they really want.
That actor to say, here's what I want. They just want the actor to kind of… follow…
Director's vision, and I don't know if that's true. That's why I asked the question.
If collaboration is a thing.
I think… I think there's… there's some… there's some range of relationships between actors and directors, and each director is quirky in their way, but… but some directors are really permeable to actors going, no, no, no, I don't think this is working, let's do this instead, and then they're like.
So, and other directors are like, yeah, no, you do exactly what I said, and with the nuances that I just gave you.
You know, and the notes, apparently passing notes to people is a thing in movie making.
So, thank you, but… We have a whole mess of people in the queue, so Gil.
Yeah. And other actors and directors start from the premise of, let's invent this together.
Like Mike Lee, that's what I mean.
And it happened. Like Mike Lee and many others, and it hap… I was just watching a conversation last night between Robert Icky and Andrew Scott about the magnificent Hamlet they did at the Almeida theater a few years ago.
Which was very much collabor… I mean, they said, let's work together on something, what should we work on together? And they finally chose Hamlet as the target, and then they invented the play, so, you know.
I think that fits with what Scott's talking about, and in my experience, it's far more common.
Scott, than maybe in your experience, whether it's in, you know, human relationships or people starting companies, or cutting deals, or building united fronts against fascism, or what have you, I think there's been lots of whatever this is in human.
Experience, but I'm saying whatever this is, this is feeling like a very problematic conversation, because we're talking about… two overlapping things. One is the nature of human interaction.
For common purpose, and the other is the word labels that we are giving to different types of human.
Interaction. And I suspect that all of us, many of us, may have very different definitions of what collaboration, cooperation, coordination.
Uh, compromise other things actually mean. So we're… I'm very wary of having a debate about words where we're using the words in different ways, about meanings of different things that we aren't even clear about, so I don't know where to go with this conversation.
Thanks, Gil. Alex?
I'll stop there. Except to say, again, like, my experience in life is… seems to be very different than Scott's experience in life about people working together.
Which is, I think, a really interesting thing to explore, given this theme.
I like that vector a lot. Alex?
Right, um, I think… By the time I came across it just now, I think you've kind of covered everything. So…
My initial definition or understanding of collaboration is. Where I work with people on an equal basis to problem-solve or whatever, and as a.
As a team, or as the interaction between. Collaborative parties.
Gives off new ideas, new tacks, or whatever. So it's different from.
What I suspect what you guys covered is teamwork. But I just cheated, and I went to AI, and I said, what are the different types of collaboration?
What?
There's about 30 of them in there. Um, you know, just take a pic, mentioned a lot of them.
Um, and my personal thing about collaboration is not. The… who's the chief? Who's this role? Who's that role? It's…
You know, it's more like social community goal type of collaboration. It's that end of it.
Or, in this case of. Building products using AI, IT, or whatever.
It's working together to do… it's not a hierarchical thing. So, um, anyway, that's basically where I stand on collaboration.
And I'm interested in this, because. I never thought there was another meaning to it.
Like the one Scott put across.
Um, I met a question for this conversation. Is this conversation a collaboration on exploring the word collaboration? But we don't need to answer that right now.
Let's go to Jose.
Um… Thanks for throwing that question into my brain, just to confuse me a little bit more.
Um… So.
Hey, anything we can do.
To Scott's point about, um… the definitions. I, myself, have…
Sort of used a similar defin. Two different definitions, but similar to what's caught.
Is describing with cooperation and collaboration. Uh, in corporate, I think most organizations.
Um, are good at doing cooperation. Teams work together, but they do so…
Independently. They don't do it… together, right? They're not actually working together.
You do your side, I do my side, we pass it along.
My department passes it to your department, my team passes it to your team.
This one individual does some work. Passes it to the other individual, so it's very sort of linear in the way that it works.
I incorporate, rarely saw. The, uh… what I call true collaboration.
And to me, that means. I think closer to what Scott's talking about, where.
We sort of work together in the moment. Um, developing something together.
At the same time. Not… not as a handoff. Type of situation. You go do your task, I'll go do my task, that kind of thing.
And I think that… you know, having done a bunch of startups and having partners.
It's rare, I disagree with Gil, um… It's rare that you get that.
True kind of collaboration. Where both parties sort of just…
Both or more, uh, sort of drop a lot of their… ego, whatever, whatever it might be.
Um, to… to sit down. Together and actually… let the juices roll, and, like, beat off of each other, and support one another, and…
Like, yeah, I like that idea, let's do this, and I like that, and let's do that, and… So, that kind of thing I've found.
Doesn't happen as often as I would have liked in my career.
Um, and… And that what does happen is more of the cooperation than the collaboration. So that's my view on…
That's the language I use. I'm not trying to define anything for anybody, that's just my… my experience and definition of.
Um, of those terms. And what comes of them, um, in, in…
True, uh, efforts that I've participated in. That's it.
Thank you. Kevin?
You know, hundreds of social entrepreneurs who were scholarshiped at SoCap.
Um, they would use, um. The word coordination, and I've wanted to learn to step back from that, and I buy into Ronald Coast's transaction theory, he's the one that's.
Came up with a theory of the firm as well, and he said you start with discovery.
Who's doing what. Then you find one-off cooperations that work in that instance.
And coordination is where signals are automated. It's like where train tracks are, exchanges are.
Everybody agrees on the role, and it's not revisited again. And you get there, you know, when you've decided that the width of the train tracks.
Will be the same, and you don't have to offload from the Vanderbilt's tracks to the folks doing the Erie Canal.
Uh, you know, coordination requires. Limitation within… accepted limits within those groups.
And it's a restraint that causes things to flow easily and quickly.
And so I just, you know, when people say, what's coordination? Well, you know, it is where social entrepreneurs express their delusion.
Of how they will change the world. And realizing that coordination is.
The third step, after you know who's doing what and who's doing something like you, and how you explain yourself.
Versus the other folks, and where the differentiation goes. And it also has to be in where you realize who's your partner and who's your stakeholder. Your partners are like the folks in… in…
I just want to know. They're working on housing.
The stakeholders are folks who have. Validation and resources that we want to access.
They are not on our team, we're trying to get their resources into our.
Universe of solving this problem, of a… 1,000 people lost houses. And so, you know, you have to know who your partners are and who your stakeholders are.
And how to get to the folks with power, influence, and resources to the group that is partnering.
And cooperating and collaborating, partnering and collaborating. I don't see as different. I always work with groups, and Scott does individuals.
Because I've discovered that, you know, I'm not the on-the-ground person, but I can help the folks who are working.
Figure out the resources and who needs to be at the table.
And so you have to know your role. When you are… you know, I'm…
When I tried to solve malaria in Mozambique. And slowly, and I discovered I was uniquely bad as a community organizer.
But I was good at getting the resources to the folks doing the work, and I've stopped trying to be.
The guy on the ground, and so you have to know where you work.
And I'm extremely effective one step up, and I'm extremely bad.
Down at the level where I failed at malaria and all the other things where I failed, like that.
So, that's… I think about this a lot, because I do it a lot.
Thanks for your reflections, Kevin. Doug?
Yeah, so… I want to… I want to just sort of offer a…
A drop out of the industrial. A noun version.
To sort of a slightly more semantic. Question and level.
So, um, human beings coming together to. Co-create together.
Or to, you know, solve a collective challenge together. Um.
For me, that question, Scott, about collaboration. Really tickled something that I've spent.
A huge amount of time over the last several years. Searching for it, sort of like a truffle.
Which is, is there a paradigmatically different way. Are from leading to co-creating together.
That doesn't have all these industrial age afflictions. Like ownership.
Power over. Ego attachment.
Fear, scarcity. Like, that whole bucket that I just listed…
It's a direct growth out of… an industrialization and nouning of the world, and relating to human beings.
Not as living… emotional… creatures, but as, uh, you know.
Machine parts. And, um, if you…
Float above the industrial one if you let go of all of those.
Drivers, which are all sort of brainstone territory. If you can actually sort of not have those running the show.
Not have those being the contextual ones. And constraints.
Some really interesting possibilities open up. And I have actually… so, just to bring rubber to the ground, rubber meeting the road.
So there's a young woman, and I… in, um… In Nigeria, she's an attorney, 30 years old. She created a non-profit foundation to help.
Women entrepreneurs. More specifically women coming out of domestic violence situations.
And, um… Her foundation doesn't really proprietarily to the women that she helps.
It's sort of a conduit, it's a pipeline, it's a funnel.
And she spends as much time networking with other organizations and entities and agencies and stuff.
That, uh, connect to those women that she's helping as beneficiaries.
So she's conduit, she's part conduit. She's part service provider, direct service provider. She's resource intrinsic.
Herself… And…
I think about so many of the nonprofits. And NGOs that I've crossed paths with.
That, um… are afflicted with a kind of proprietariness about where the sole source of the help.
That we're providing to the beneficiaries. Point to that we're serving.
And there are closed systems, and other NGOs in the same space are competitors.
Which, again, is back to that industrial. Frame and orientation.
So, I really think the inquiry is, can we co-create together?
Not from scarcity, but from abundance, not from… hard boundaries.
And proprietary… you know, assertion of power or authority or control or scarcity around resources, all that stuff.
But can we actually. Come from a place of, you know, of porous boundaries, of openness, of curiosity, of appreciation.
Of, um, the ecosystem of folks. That we find ourselves in the middle of, because everybody has an affinity around the same things they're trying to solve for.
As a value-add at all. So, with that, I'm complete.
Dan, thank you very much for your publications. I love the angle of, you know, can we step outside, sort of, the Western object-noun-oriented thing, ownership thing.
And go back to other examples. Scott, feel free to jump in between what anybody says. You've posed a question for us, so I feel like.
Do you have free reign to jump in and out whenever you want.
And I just wanna… I just wanna add something as an example of… I think an example of what Doug just gave us.
Which comes from the book, The Biggest Estate on Earth, How the Aborigines Made Australia, known as Bill Gammage describes how.
Two-thirds of the landmass of Australia was under active human management before the First Fleet arrives, before European convicts and other people arrived.
Two-thirds of the place, and basically the tracks were quite mobile.
But they would… it's like… When April and I were in Mongolia, the families that… the half the population lives out on the steppe, half the population is in the one big city, Ulaanbaatar.
People out on the step move 3 times a year. They have winter quarters, they have sort of different quarters, and they're busy grazing their animals and doing whatever. But in Australia.
You would drop some spin effects near the forest. You might thin the forest a little bit, but you knew that kangaroos love spin effects, so if you plant a bunch of spin effects just outside the forest, you know that they're going to be feeding there next time you come around.
And it might be another tribe that catches, you know, some of the kangaroos, and nobody's going to take all the kangaroos, because there's a lot of them.
But you're busy managing all different parts and aspects in complementary ways, with no sense of.
There's a fence here, and this plot is mine and not yours. Like, not at all. It's just, like, we're all managing this place, and what's dramatic is that in… I think it's pretty sure it's this book, he describes reading the diaries of the First Fleet.
And he reads the diaries of these gentlemen who bring their horses ashore.
And start walking… start riding around in the forest. And they're like.
This is like a gentleman's forest. You reach up and there's an apple, you look down and there's a gourd. Oh my gosh, the state of nature in Australia must be very different.
From, you know, England or whatever. And it's like, yeah, no, that was actually the active, active…
Collaboration, and this is why I'm raising the question, is this collaboration? These are hands-off, these are people who've developed these practices over possibly 30,000 years.
Um, that seem to work really well, that fail once somebody brings sheep and lets the sheep loose on the landscape by the way.
To go graze. Like, it suddenly dawns on me, oh my god, the sheep on these first ships go tear up.
This man-made landscape, and there's no… you can't… you can't really stop them. Nobody wants to put… because it's not about fences, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera, right?
So, it's a fascinating… a riddle about how do you have a continent as big as Australia that is doing, I think, really pretty well before the First Fleets show up.
And how do you preserve any of that once… capitalism, objects, the things that Doug was just critiquing for us.
Fall into the space and eat it. They… because… because capitalism is quite voracious.
Uh, and doesn't really like to coexist with other systems, so it will… it will, you know.
Take up all that space. Sorry to go so long, but… but I love the example, and it was very struck when I read about, sort of, Aboriginal practices.
And I'm on the quest for how do we steward instead of own.
In modern times. Right? How do we drag some of this.
Forward into today, because it seems to me to be a highly practical abundance creation machine.
That it's very social and, um, passed from people to people.
What was the name of the book again? Oh, the state, okay.
It's in the chat. The biggest estate on Earth. Yeah, biggest estate… build gamut.
I'm gonna drop in… I want to drop in something to actually conflict with where Doug went. He said that.
Go ahead.
Nonprofits have an industrial frame, they don't. They have an artificially scarcity-induced mindset by foundation program grants. I was working with a.
Food systems in Oakland, and Kellogg, I think, put up $10 million if they could agree on it.
And nobody could, because they all had to report upstream to the… Program grant manager's theory of change and size of the thing, and so they had to give back the 10 million.
And it's, you know, foundations are… profoundly dysfunctional. You know, they have no predators, and they don't evolve.
But they keep cooperation between nonprofits limited because of the oppressiveness of program grants, the colonial nature of program grants. So that's just… It's not industrial, it's the philanthropic industrial complex.
I want to check in with Scott. Do you want to jump in on anything? Otherwise, I'm going to go to Sean.
Uh, very quickly, um, there was a wonderful little side conversation between Jerry and Gil about, uh, Jazz Combo.
And I think it fits with my thesis. I would say a jazz quartet is a collaboration, because if you change the musicians, it changes the outcome.
And one of the reasons I say that is that we name the musicians.
And in a marching band, we typically do not name the musicians. We name.
The team, and… So I would say that that, you know, a marching band is cooperation and teamwork.
But I wouldn't consider it collaboration. And the second thing is, is that I put a…
An engram, because I enjoy the engrams, um, and I started looking at.
I found it funny that the rise of collaboration, which happened.
You know, looks like after the 80s. Um, the rise of the collaboration.
Coincided with the fall of… Deadline. And it also coincided with the rise of iterative.
So, there might have been some… I know some of you are more involved in the software side of things.
You know, it feels like that… kind of relates in some way, because I know that.
One group will get interested in, oh. We're now doing a waterfall model, and then another.
Industry will pick that up, even though they're doing something completely different and doesn't fit. They're using it, and I think my… My main thing is people using the word collaboration.
Is far greater than the people who are actually collaborating. Their actual true collaborative situations, and I don't know if that's true, but that's my thought.
Thanks, Scott. Sean, thank you for your patience.
Um, when Scott made his remarks, uh, last week, I really, uh, I really perked up because, uh.
Because that is strongly my experience, um, that we're, uh, that we're really challenged to collaborate in a deep way, and, uh.
Jury's recent remarks here, and Doug's, I, uh, deeply resonate with as well.
Uh, I think, uh, the conditions for… for profound collaboration?
Are so delicate. And the procedures… needed to actually accomplish the…
The, uh… development of the shared understandings. And the, uh, and the shared, um… the shared conception of.
What's even the language game that we're playing here together in this moment?
What are we doing now in this conversation? Uh, and what do the words that come out of my mouth and your mouth mean, and which are the same? And even though some of them might be the same, are they…
Are our meanings are the meanings that we attach to those words sufficiently equivalent, uh, so that we can move forward without, uh, further, uh, definition, refinement, clarification.
Um, and then, what are our goals? What… what… what are our objectives? What, uh, what do we come to this engagement?
Um, uh, offering and asking and, uh, and, um… Um, intending.
Um, it's such an incredibly subtle dance, and um… And I would submit that, uh, that as the number of participants in the conversation grow, um, there's a violent, um.
Cliff, right after 2.
Pretty big cliff. Really big cliff, and that was the thing… that was the thing that… that really…
That, yeah, Sky, so that was… That was what… that was part of what you were saying, right? And that is a really big issue for me. But after.
Then what happens is that when. There's a third person who remarks, or, uh, you know, feels a need to participate, or gets impatient, or, you know, takes us off on a tangent, or whatever, then.
Then the subtle dance that's going on between a 2. Um, is disrupted.
And the… and the mind melding. That's absolutely critical.
To the, um… to the unification of understanding and purpose and intent.
That is elemental, fundamental to true collaboration, is disrupted. And so, so in a group of this size.
Uh, there's… However gifted.
However resonant. However well-intentioned the participants.
Um, it's more like a playground, and there's a bunch of stuff that happened.
Rather than… rather than, uh, rather than there really being the possibility of, um, of, uh, the deep.
Harmonization of, um, of understanding. That has to be the foundation for, um, uh, for…
Profound, um, shared purpose in action. I have so much more to say, but.
I'm so excited because that's… you expressed that in a way that I haven't been able to, and that makes me… Excited that we're all talking about this, because I can see all the points on the different sides, everyone.
Yeah.
As engaged and engaged in it, and I… I think your cliff is a brilliant metaphor, so thank you for that.
And I… I kind of… I kind of want to disagree and agree with what Sean was just saying.
In the sense of… I think that broader collaborations are sort of rare, and Brian Eno coined the term genius.
For, like, when bands start composing things together, uh, look at the short video clip that I posted in the chat.
It's Eno explaining what he meant by CNES. Other people have picked up the term Cenius. And Cenius is a scene that has genius. It's a… You know, it's a… squeezing together of those words, but.
Um… I think that there are moments where there are communities of co-creators that have seen us.
It's just that they're kind of precious. And I think that our fear of the cliff.
For our… our dread of the cliff of… the Cliff of Two, as I will dub it.
Is, um, that it's very hard to somehow get a group to cross over into seniors. You can't… you certainly can't.
Force it to, and then there's something about that degree of collaboration that involves the dropping of egos.
And the permeability to other people's ideas, which may not… which are not the same thing. I mean, I'm pretty sure the Beatles individually had pretty big egos.
But they managed to blend their skills and crafts and understandings of what they wanted to make in a genius way. So the Beatles, I think, had seniors, and the things that they composed over time.
I think Scott's heads just exploded. Um, go for it.
It's collective flow. That's what I haven't been able to say.
Collective flow. Okay.
Collective flow, where you lose… you said it, Jerry, you lose the sense of self.
Because you are… it's like, man, we are just… We're… we're in sync.
You know, and it's so delicate, and it's so rare, as Sean has said, and my… initial comment was because I feel like we say, no.
Collaboration is everywhere, and I'm like, no, it's so precious.
Right. And you're basically helping us. Appreciate and raise the specialness.
Of this kind of collaboration. A word that we would normally just sort of chuck around. So I like that.
Thank you for that gift into this conversation. Uh, Sharon Nelson.
Uh, just a couple small comments, um… I do think it's helpful to do what Scott just did, which was distinguish between.
Real-time… together activities, and…
Longer-term, multi-person collaborations that could be. Seniors, but may not be synchronous.
It may be that, you know, there's a group that's really aligned, and, you know, one person can send an email from Hong Kong, and.
Somebody will pick it up a few hours later in Kenya, and… the thread, or the…
The listserv will just explode with great new ideas that would not be possible with individuals.
But I wanted to point to the work that John Seeley Brown did probably 20 years ago.
About swarm innovation and swarm manufacturing in China. And he was struck by the fact that you had these Chinese factories that were pumping out.
Honda motorcycles for the Japanese. They did that by day.
And then by night. Both the people in the factory.
And the people in the factories that built the little machine parts that went into the Honda.
Were swarming together. And finding ways to make those parts.
A little cheaper, a little faster, a little better. Even make them last longer.
And they were producing a Honda knockoff at night. That was half the price and twice as good.
It was… it was really funny. It was almost like… united by a desire to rip off the Japanese.
They were stealing the intellectual property, and they didn't have any intellectual property between them. That was… that was… to the point made earlier about IP being a huge barrier.
To the selfless sharing of ideas. But I… I thought their case studies were… were right on target, and it may be…
Kind of special to that arrangement, and it may be that… a lot of other types of collaboration.
Are not going to be as easy to instigate. Because clearly, in that case.
You know, people weren't even meeting face-to-face that much. They were often just… sending over a part and saying, hey, does this… what do you think? This looks better to me. And, um…
Because they were united by common cause and common language, and common desire to make more money.
Um, they could do it. Um, I don't think that's…
Just coordination. It seems to me more of a collaboration. The other point I wanted to make, and speaking to the Chinese, there's a brand new book out in the last week called.
Breakneck. The Chinese quest to engineer the future.
And if you don't want to read the book, uh, watch some of the podcasts with the author.
Popping up in lots of places. But the thing that's been getting lots of attention, particularly in the review in the Wall Street Journal.
Is his punchline, which was. China…
Has put engineers in charge. Who want to construct.
America has become a lawyerly society. Where the goal is to obstruct.
And the book is just full of case after case after case of where the American system has just gotten in its own way.
You know, for good goals. You know, we want fairness, we want environmental protection, we want all these things.
But we're not doing it in a way that works. We're often giving one lawyer working for one client the ability to shut down a $10 billion project for years.
And that, that, uh, that may be one reason the book's getting lots of attention, but I think the better reason is we should all read it and just be a little bit concerned and scared.
About the future of our investment portfolio, if it's basically. 80% in American stocks and bonds.
Just a thought.
Love that, Bob. Um… Thanks, Mike. Ken.
Hmm. Um… My take on collaboration has to do with… with… conversation. And I come at it through that door because…
Um, in the… early 2000s, I was looking at, you know, I work with clients who are very skilled.
Very well resourced, very intelligent, and very well-intentioned, and yet they're not able to bring in their projects on time and on budget.
Why is that? It's not because they lack good intentions, it's not because they lack skill.
Not because they lack resources. And when I took my coach training, I was taught.
A good coach identifies what the person wants to do, and then identifies the competencies that that person needs in order to complete what they want to do.
So I sort of look at teams. I said, these people do not have conversational competency. They don't have the right conversation about the right thing at the right time with the right people.
So that led me to asking myself, is there a minimum set of conversations that will allow a team to take something.
From concept through to completion, and if so, what is that?
I came up with 4 conversations. And what I noticed is that most people start with conversation 3, which is why so many things tend to break down.
Conversation 3 is the one they teach you in business school. It's the coordination of actions. What's the goal? What's the timeline? What's the critical path? How do you allocate resources? Blah blah blah. But if you haven't built relationships, and if you haven't explored.
How to work together in ways that are fulfilling, then you're gonna have a lot of problems with that third conversation. So the first conversation is.
Why are we here? What's this… this thing we're attempting to do. Why is it important to you? Jerry, what do you bring to it? Mike, what do you bring to it? Stacy, what do you bring to it? What do you want to get out of it?
Why are you here? How does it relate to you in a way that actually is part of who you are?
And if you're working in a company where you really don't want to be, you're not going to be a good collaborator.
So, first you identify what I call… you share what's meaningful.
And at the end of the shared meaning conversation, everyone has a sense of commonality. You'll also hear things that really don't apply to you, but that's fine, because you've listened very carefully to.
These are the things that we all agree on are important.
And then I usually do some improv exercises, get people's brains warmed up, and explore what's possible.
I was working with a bunch of bank… bankers, and they're like, we don't have a choice. We have to obey these very stringent rules.
And I said, well, what if you could actually step outside those rules? What if you had an unlimited budget, could suspend the laws of physics.
We did some improv exercises, they came up with several ways that will allow them to meet the rules and still do the work in ways that would allow them to feel.
That it was innovative on their part, that it was fulfilling, that it was growing them as people, growing them as professionals.
This gets into Dan Pink's work on, um, people want purpose, autonomy, and mastery, right? So you bring that in.
And, um, and you generate a bunch of possibilities. And you say, now we do have real-world constraints. We have budgets, we have rules, regulations, so.
Of this cloud of possibilities, which one stands the best chance of succeeding?
And you choose that, and everyone has to say, it's not my first choice, but I will work on it. I give that my all.
Because if you're not, you're a whole draining stuff out. So yes, we're all gonna work on that. Then you do the third conversation of coordinating your collective actions.
And then the last conversation is the one I always get pushback on. You do an after-action review, which begins with.
Who needs to be acknowledged for their work? And the answer is everyone who contributed.
If you don't do that, people get very upset. And you look at… What do we do that we can replicate that taught us a good lesson that's really valuable? What did we do that didn't fail, but that did something completely unexpected?
I never use the word failure, because failure is a very freighted word, and it brings… evokes things for people that are not pleasant, so… You know, we attempted to do X and think it would bring us to Y, but it brought us to C prime.
Why was that? What do we learn from that? And what competencies do we develop as individuals and a team that will serve us?
If we're going for it as a team, how can we use what we learned here to be more effective next time? And if we're breaking up and going somewhere else, what are we bringing that we can bring to our next team that will help them?
And then you get a nice little learning circle. And it's a complete… there are other conversations, but those are the main conversations that coordinate work. This is specifically focused on work. It's not pure dialogue, it's not Bowman dialogue, it's like, how are we going to get this done?
That's my idea of how you use conversations to collaborate. Somebody was… Jerry, you were talking about Australia. The same is true of North America, of Turtle Island. The entire continent.
Was completely. Under care of, you know, they used, uh, slash and ruined agriculture, there were huge forests of perennial nuts and… and, I mean, it was an abundance, and the Europeans didn't recognize.
How the whole continent had been shaped as a food farm. You know, anywhere you went, there was an abundance of food.
So, that's a different kind of collaboration. That's a collaboration with the land.
That's a collaboration with the living environment that we're all immersed in, that.
Requires way different skills than simply talking together. Although, if you look at Ancient Futures Learning from Ladak.
Before the road went through into a dock, these people were in such harmony with their environment. It was a very… it would only hold a certain amount of.
People. If you exceeded that peop… that number of people, there'd be famine, there'd be problems. So, they're very much in balance. Women had.
Multiple husbands, and the husbands spent time in monasteries, so they kept the population low.
Everyone had a place to stay. Everyone had food in their stomach, everyone had access to education. Then, when the road went through and the West came in, and if you watch, you go to YouTube and you can Google Ancient Futures, only from a dock, you can watch your movie.
You'll see the weak link is the teenage boy. He's the one who says, I don't want to hold hands with my grandma. I don't want to… I don't want to wear traditional clothing, and he's got a pack of marbles rolled up in his t-shirt, and he's trying to look tough and cool like James Dean, you know, and…
That shattered everything. The entire irrigation system was designed such that if you were up there and you noticed that some water was draining out.
You didn't call Public Works, you went over there and fixed it yourself. That was… you collaborated with the entire community to keep the community intact.
That was a real commons architecture and a real collaborative commons architecture. So, I go on and on, but… Uh, that's… that's my take on… on where I come from on collaboration, and that's just a small part. There's lots more, but…
I will say one more thing. In humanizing the conversation around.
Getting work done, the third part, the third conversation of courting actions. I need to know what you look like when you're really stressed.
You know, you're on your way to work, and you get a speeding ticket, you get to work, and your boss says, I need this done, and then you got a call from the principal's office, and your kid's there, and they want you in there right away.
You're now like, oh my god, and if I notice you're stressed, I can come in and say, what do you need? How can I help you?
I don't ignore you. And so this is really important. You have to decide.
How we're going to support each other through stressful times, and how we're going to handle conflict, which is another completely separate and yet integrative part of that.
So, enough said.
I'm going to jump in just for a moment, please. Ken, that was beautiful. I think this is going to come down as one of those.
Go ahead.
Little clips, if you… If you are practiced in saying that.
Awesome. If that was a… just an awesome riff. It was captured in such a… compact and dense.
Perfect nutshell, you might want to go back and find that. It's like.
I've been doing this for 20 years, Scott. I talk about this all the time.
Here's… It was… well, okay, it came through. It came through. Um… So, here's a thought, and I think this is relating to…
Doug, talking about the humanity of… of this, and… I thought, is there anything that celebrates the human more than a deep, true collaboration?
It could be designing a meal together. True respect.
Honoring, asking for the unique contribution and experience and perspective. Of your collaborative partner.
That kind of gets at the root of it in a way.
Because it's… I can't just have someone who's helping me.
Do my thing. It's about us, and it's about… me seeing you, and honoring you, and integrating your with mine.
And, like, how do we do that? And that's why I think it's so… Sean didn't say this, but the words that are coming to mind is intimate.
You know, it really is, when you really have that collaborative moment, it's so addictive because it's like.
We all have these walls between us and everyone else, and all of a sudden, that wall isn't there anymore.
You know, or that's what it feels like to me, is I'm actually seeing another person, and I'm… taking parts of me and parts of them, and we're creating this third thing.
Thank you. Um, Ken, have you written up a recorded, uh, in particular the part about the multiple conversations that.
Teams need to have… have you… is that out in the world someplace?
In various places. I really should sit down and. Do what I just did here.
Um, so when…
This is the little graphic that I created many years ago, back in 0… 08, um… If you're having trouble, uh, recording your actions, go back and check did you… did you choose the right possibility? If you didn't choose it.
Did you generate it? If you didn't generate it, go back and check your shared understanding.
So it also works backwards. And as I was developing this, I was reading, um, difficult conversations, which is a great book, but it's got 13 steps.
I don't know about you, my short-term memory does not handle 13 steps, man. I needed 4, you know?
Mm-hmm, mm-hmm. Thanks, Ken. Thanks a lot.
Gil.
Yeah, good stuff. Um, uh… Scott, the, um… that example of people cooking a meal together was one that rose, in my mind, earlier in this conversation.
Uh, because there's a kind of seamless dance that can happen when that happens. And there's also the time when one person just wants to make a meal for everybody else and has a way they want to do it, and that's a gift, too.
Uh, so, you know, wide range of delightfulness and human experience here, and of breakdown and suffering across this whole spectrum.
Ken said he could go on at length about this, um, and he can, because, you know, the name of his business presence includes the word collaborate in it.
So this guy's been there a long time. Um, on the, uh, and I love the scheme in Kenya, please do…
Um, you know, craft something here. It's delicious. Uh, um… on the step of possibility, though, of asking what's possible here, it's really important that.
That… that that BS in a way that doesn't shut down possibility.
And doesn't shut down creativity. And Ken and I hosted last month on Living Between Worlds a, uh.
A wacky guy named Stuart Hill, who's an 82-year-old emeritus professor. I knew him through the Regenerative Agriculture world decades ago.
And he's got a bunch of tricks up his sleeve, one of which is, uh, is, uh.
Um, well, he gathered together a bunch of farmers in Canada to talk about regenerative futures, and had them… there was lectures and there was discussions, they were small groups, and had people break up in small groups and talk about what they would… what they were doing and what they could do.
And he said the mood of the room was just really down. It was boring, constrained, the conversations weren't interesting.
Um, people were taking very limited steps into what they thought was possible.
And they shuffled the groups and asked people to tell the biggest possible lie they could about what they had done in some imagined future.
And the vibe of the room changed completely, and there was laughter and play.
And he talks about one guy who said, I, you know.
What I did was I ran… I ran a nature strip through my 20,000 acres, and the birds return, and he, like, he, like, spun a story with life and vibrancy in it that… That showed that he understood the whole ecological framework, that he was not operating his foreman. He had it as a vision, but it wasn't possible.
Until he was invited to lie boldly. About it. And so, uh, we, you know, we did a… we did a show together about lying boldly as a tool for change.
And I just want to add that to the question of thinking about what's possible, because you want to… you often want to break that open, because what's possible is constrained by history.
And experience, and, uh, and a fear. Of imagining.
So, thanks, Ken.
Hi, Reed, can I just make a contribution?
Can you hear me? I don't… I can't hear anyone at the moment.
Yes, we can hear you.
Yeah, thank you.
Sorry, sorry, I muted myself. Uh, yes, please, go ahead.
Um, okay, it's not collaboration, but something Kent said, uh, kind of… reminded me of something my father told me many moons ago.
So, between… My father was from the island of Rhodes, uh, Rothos, in Greece.
And between… at the end of the First World War. And until the Second World War.
It was given over to the Italians. And it was… was… belonged to the Ottoman Empire before.
That is given to the Italians, and then became Greek after the Second World War.
So, above the… where my father's village is, is a hill, which was… the Italians took it up and made it into a phenomenal garden place. It was really beautiful, whatever.
Which has since gone to ruin, because. It was never carried on by the Greeks, or whatever. But one thing that resonated with me.
There's not so much collaboration, but… achievement, perhaps force collaboration, but whatever.
And what it was, he said, the Italians had a different way of doing this.
Looking after the gardens. They allocated 150 meters of garden and width from the main road. There's a winding road going up.
Every 150 meters was someone else was responsible for it. Those are gardeners specific to that, because when Ken said, oh, Winnie, there's a problem, he.
I don't know, central departments or whatever. In that case, literally, they had each.
Person had. Now, if you're going to see the… if you were to see the place.
Nothing would have happened without collaboration. But they were… responsible directly for a piece of.
Kind of garden, if you like. And apparently they were beautiful, but, um… That's gone out of the… that's gone nowhere now, so, um, I just thought there might be a…
Slice and dice and collaborate. Aspect to this.
Go ahead, Scott.
I was going through my notes from the last. Meeting where I brought this up, and there were two comments that people had made.
That I would like to elaborate on. The first one is Gil.
You… I'm going to… probably misquote you here, so I'd like you to correct it if you…
Feel like that's… is… I'm hoping that Gil is still here.
Um… it was… collaboration is a skill to develop. That's what I wrote down.
And I believe it was part of a larger. Comment, and I don't know if you're still there, Gil?
Yes. He's in an endless library that just goes back forever and ever.
Here.
Okay, um, so I was wondering if you… Oh, oh, I'm sorry, I'm seeing your note-taker.
Yeah, exactly. Don't be fooled.
We're both here.
But the dark screen. Okay, my bad. Yes. So I'm curious if you could elaborate on what you mean by collaboration is a skill to develop, because my thought was.
Well, if you don't know what collaboration is, how can you.
Develop the skill or know that you're getting better at it, but I'm very curious what your.
Extended thoughts around that, because it was kind of an offhand comment, I believe, that you made last time.
Maybe you have to know what it is, or maybe you have to have experienced it.
And say, oh, I like that, I want to do more of that.
I think, uh, you know.
I think Ken spoke very well to some of what developing the skill looks like.
Um, and, you know, that's a framework for cultivating it in a group, or maybe educating people in it, but people also have the experience in real life, in kindergarten.
Man, you know? That's some of what that's about.
And there's…
That, that, that helps. I think that connects to my… sense that it's rare and precious and delightful.
And that you, when you experience it. Like, cool, yeah, I want… more, more, please.
Yeah, and there are ways of cultivating relationships and conversations and teams and organizations and so forth that nurture it more or less.
So there are the skills of collaboration, and there's the meta-skills of cultivating collaboration, in the sense that we're talking about it here.
And, uh, you know, I'm struck throughout this whole conversation at how easy it is for us to generalize, um, about what's so, but the range of human experience is vast around this.
You know, we have the full spectrum from, you know, from, you know, brutal authoritarian to playful.
Playful inventing together. Uh, they're all there. We've probably all experienced some flavors of many of those.
Um, and so what's interesting is, well, you know, Ken, where are your questions? I want to look at them again.
Um, you know, why are we here? Um, what is it that we want? For Bob Dunham talks about, for the sake of what, as the question behind every interaction.
And it's usually tacit, and it's sometimes useful to surface it, or at least to be aware of it.
Because that then provides the basis of, well, you know, if we're here for similar things.
We care about similar things, even if we have apparent differences.
And this is where the United Front game comes in, and the current, you know, the current political situation.
Pre-yesterday in the United States of people who seem to fiercely disagree about certain things, but who actually care.
Very similarly about some things. That may be sometimes possibly provides an opening for collaboration, even across difference.
Which is where it gets really interesting, because we're… if we're… if we're all in agreement on everything, collaboration is one thing, but if we're different, whether in… perspective or cultural background, or age or gender, or the many different things we can be different on.
And still find ways to collaborate around common concerns, that's where human… being gets really interesting to me.
Yeah, I don't think that we can collaborate if we're both the same.
I think it depends on the difference. It is the bringing together of the difference.
But we're never… we're never the… we're the same and not the same, right?
Um, go ahead. Yeah, yes. So, what that brought to mind for me is, I think this was the emotion that I was feeling when I initially started thinking about this.
I'm frustrated because I hear people using the word collaboration. As something of a tease.
To get other people to work. For them.
And I think, oh, hey, let's collaborate on this. And I think.
Okay, that was really fun, I want more of that. I enjoy that experience. This is great. We're gonna do a little mind meld, we're gonna come up with something, and then I show up, and it's like, no.
That's not what we're doing at all. This is about me wanting you to be part of my thing.
And I thought, oh, that's… That's not what I was hoping this was going to be.
Um… uh… Yeah. We, uh, we used to have a phrase in my corporate job.
Hmm, nice.
I've been partnered. Were you partnered with me on this? And it's like, that usually meant that I'm getting screwed, and you're doing the.
Telling me what to do, but I had to voluntarily say, yes, I will partner with you.
And now… never worked out so well for the one who had been partnered.
Good sign of a dysfunctional culture when you start developing internal jargon like that.
Yeah.
Um, Dave?
We did, we fixed the whole issue. It's done.
And I'm sorry I'm late, so you guys may have already covered all this stuff, but this is a… it's got its… I was thinking you probably have already gotten there, so I'll just put icing on the top or something like that. Uh, but Scott, this is, like, a topic I'm really, really curious about, too, is… and I feel like… I wonder… I mean, one of the questions is, I don't know whether you guys narrowed the definition of collaboration before I got here or not, but…
But I think Gil's right, we've been doing, I mean, collaboration is, like, what we do, right? And so, whether you want to call it slavery, or the market, or… you know, the assembly line, or… I mean, these are all technologies we've developed for collaboration.
Right? And I would argue. Pretty… pretty well supported, I think, that the, you know, the most effective collaboration we have is the multinational corporation, right?
It's hugely successful. And costs are the lowest, and production is the highest, and, you know, you want something done.
Get a multinational corporation to do it for you. And so, like, you know, kind of all of the Ezra Klein stuff around abundance is, like, you know, part of what's happened is we've tried to fight back against.
Multinational corporations by making… helping little companies and stuff do things, but it turns out they're not as efficient.
Um, they're not as good at what they do, you know? And so, you know, we have all these technologies. And I guess what's… motivated me the last, you know, couple of decades, is that I got all excited about the open collaboration stuff that we were doing at the beginning of the web.
Wikipedia and Linux and… those kinds of things, and so there was a particular category.
Of… of collaboration by choice, or something like that, that I was really interested in.
And I thought, oh, this is the answer to everything, you know? Like, everything will be a wiki.
And it turns out, over the last 25 years or 30 years, right, that's not true. There are very few wikis out there that are successful, right? There's very little collaboration, Scott, I'd say.
At that level that has been kind of, you know, spontaneously combusted.
Um, and it's like, what the fuck happened? Why was this… why is this so hard? And… and I feel like… We first, for a while, we thought we needed to open things, and so there was, like, a licensing answer, right? If you make it… if you could put a Creative Commons license on it, it'll… that'll be good, right? And now we can collaborate.
But it turns out that's not… that just means it's open. Nobody wants to play with it, because it's, like, I think your point is, it's somebody else's thing. I don't… you know, I'm not gonna rewrite their book.
Um, and… And, um… So it's not, you know, so… and that's… the question is exactly, you know, why did Wikipedia work?
But give me an example of the second Wikipedia. Right? What's another Wikipedia?
Right? We have many successful examples in software, I would argue.
And I would say the difference in software is. There's a business model that explains participation.
Right? I can solve… I can satisfy some of my… I can scratch some of my own itch.
In a software context. That motivates me to participate in making the software better. So, the point of collaboration has to be to make an asset better.
Is my theory. Right? And we have to have some… some mechanism, right, that motivates my participation in making it better.
And so, for some reason, Wikipedia works, people get excited about making it better.
Boom. Great. In Linux, you know, people… you know, and again, most of Linux contributions are large corporations.
Right? There's a little book, a number of folks who just do it on their own.
But in general, it's large corporations investing because they're going to get benefit from Linux.
Um, and software kind of, I think, has that energy. Wordpress is a really good example, right?
Where you have a lot of collaboration around the platform. But people make money out of it. They have consulting businesses and stuff. They sell products. There's an ecosystem of profit, basically.
That is, uh, that enables it. But I think we've done that reasonably rarely, and it seems like a skill set that we really ought to be much, much better at.
Um, so, Dave, you may have peeled back the lid on 3 or 4 cans of worms right there.
I'll let Scott take a start. Scott did start by refining the definition.
And differentiating collaboration from teamwork. Oh, we're… and I'm going to project what Scott might say, and then turn it over to Scott, but…
But corporations very much have distinct roles. I think, Scott would talk about them as teamwork, where in teamwork, if you can replace somebody with someone else and the output doesn't change.
That's just teamwork. And, uh, collaboration requires. The individuals to be involved and interchanged so much that the replacement of an individual changes the outcome remarkably. So I think.
The market and corporations don't fall into collaboration in Scott's definition.
But, Scott, take it away, please.
He nailed it, Jerry, that's perfect. Um, so, the only thing I'll mention is I have that one other thing I want to talk about.
That it came up from the last meeting. However, we have Ken and Doug.
Who I'm assuming are commenting on what just came, so I don't want to fracture that too much.
Cool, and I also want to mention that next week, I'm attending an event in the Bay Area. I'll be in the Bay Area all next week.
Actually, staying with Dave and Claudia. Uh, so thank you, Dave. And, um, so anybody who wants to meet up with me in the Bay Area LMK, and let's, let's schedule something, but also.
I can start the call next week, but I'm gonna have to hand it off pretty early, and I'm happy to experiment if anybody wants to run OGM next week, so… Let me know that as well. Ken, please.
Um, if someone has something that's related to what Dave just said, please go, because I was going to introduce a different, uh.
Point here.
Go for it.
Or not. Okay, um… I'm a bit of a word nerd, and 30 years ago, I was working on a project where we decided we needed to teach people about conflict resolution, so I went to Etymology Online. Actually, at that point, it wasn't Etymology Online, I went to the dictionary.
And I found out that, uh, conflict. And resolution, when combined, if you look at the roots, it actually means to resolve to be in conflict.
And my partner, Gene Dunaway, who Gil Friend knows quite well, and I said, that's a terrible.
Route for this. So, we need a different route. So we came up with… Collaborative reconciliation. And we chose collaborative because to collaborate means to work together.
That's the first definition. The second definition is to work with the enemy. And so when you have somebody that you perceive as an opponent or an enemy.
Need to learn to work with them. This is a different kind of operation than excluding them.
Because you've got to work with them, they're part of your ecosystem. And reconcile means to make friendly again. So, um, to work with the enemy, to become friends again is the point for me of anything to do with conflict. If it… if it… exacerbates the conflict that's not resolving it, and if it is helping people to say, oh, you know what, I'm stuck on my point, my ego, my… whatever it is, and I see the validity and legitimacy of this.
Of this other person's point, even if I don't agree with it, that tends to loosen things up a little bit and lets them move into a different direction in a collaborative way towards some kind of becoming friends again.
What was your alternative to conflict resolution? It was… Other reconciliation, okay.
Uh, collaborative reconciliation. And part of that comes from, uh, tradition Jerry talks about often, which is the Quakers.
They have a process, um. The quickers work on consensus, which doesn't mean…
33 to 1 is a tie. It means if somebody's, like, I'm… I'm not sure about this.
But I won't block it. However, I want to keep grappling with it. They call it grappling, and they keep… unpacking and talking until they finally come to some kind of agreement on what that means. And that can be a very long process, which I think is another thing working against us.
Um, in a capitalist society, time is money, and so you don't have time. And this is when I… present my model of conversations to potential clients. They always say, we don't have time for all that. We've got.
Too much to do. And my comeback is always, how often do you have to redo your work?
And they see pretty often, they're like, well, if you didn't have to redo it, would it be worth your time and investment? Well, yeah, it might. And so that's how I… overcome the objection.
I am reminded of Oscar Wilde's. Quote, which I can never quite remember, um…
But I'm going to try to ingrain it now. The problem with socialism is that it takes too many evenings.
This community thing, the thing about collaborating and, you know, building links and learning to trust each other is time-consuming, and there's so many Netflix series you've got to get through, or, you know, World of Warcraft, or Roblox, or whatever.
Whatever it is, we're on, right? So, so… so uncomfortable. Uh, Doug?
Um, yeah, I just wanted to… to share a… a take that emerged out of a lot of the.
Or work, um, I've been doing with partners over the last few years.
And… If… if there's truly.
Sort of, uh, I think to Ken's earlier contribution about. If there's truly, you know, shared clarity.
And… and commitment on a personal level. To the collective mission, whatever that is.
When there's a conflict. Which… which, for me.
Isn't about, you know. The… the sort of first-tier.
Polarity involved. But conflict as in when somebody is triggered.
Because that's usually the… the… the active ingredient.
Um.
We developed a practice of… Um, basically, it's a full stop.
And whatever that was going on, it's a full stop. And the reason for that is because if somebody was triggered, they just left the team.
They just left whatever the collective endeavor is, and they're now facing internally.
100%. So… Um, we're down a person.
And, uh, it doesn't make sense to proceed. Down a person.
And, um… And so that person has an opportunity to share.
And to be heard. Um, it is not an opportunity for anybody to respond or to try to fix it, or to…
Reflect back or to do anything. They just get an opportunity to really share.
Be heard. There's a pause, and then… There's an opportunity for people to ask questions, but those questions are to make sure they got what was shared. They understand.
What that person is experiencing, was feeling, and what was triggering to them.
In that, it's… it's related to as a gift. Because if that person was triggered internally.
Then leaving the risk of that triggering. Happening again in the future, either with them or somebody else, or somebody external to the organization, is at the expense of the whole endeavor and everybody in it.
So, if we trigger not constructive or helpful. Let's figure out how to take care of that right now, so that at least that.
Triggering is off the table. And the only reason I'm sharing this is because.
Um, it's a… It affords a recontextualization.
That over time builds strength, builds resistance, builds trust, builds connection. It really deepens the power of the… collective.
Because in working through that, in sharing that, in receiving and holding it as a gift to the whole.
It sort of inverts the orientation. To dissent and disruption.
And I'm not sure how that plugged into this flow, but it seemed.
Something to share. I'm complete.
Hey, Pete, I think you should go, and then I'll introduce this other thing to kind of wrap us up.
Thanks, Doug.
Uh, thanks, Scott. Um, real quick, I wanted to pick up two things I mentioned in chat, and also a little bit.
Expand or build on something Dave said. Um, one of them… I had two different kinds of collaboration, which we didn't quite hit on here, which I'm experienced with, and I wanted to share about.
Um, one of them was one of the most fun things I ever did was in my 20s, I worked, um.
Selling big software. Products, um, and I was a member of a 4- or 5-person sales team. We would meet with a 4- or 5-person.
Purchasing team, and… After, uh, same thing, pitching to VCs, kind of. Um…
Uh, after, you know, 5 or 10 pitches together, you kind of knew the way your team worked.
Um, and it felt like a collaboration, it felt like a basketball team or a football, uh, soccer team.
Where I knew what I could talk about effectively, and I knew what somebody else could talk about effectively, and vice versa, and we could pass the topic.
Um, and we did it very gracefully and without the other team really knowing what was going on, how we were playing.
And they were doing the same thing on the other side. So, one of the things that I really enjoyed about that was not only.
Playing positions really well and passing the ball really well, the topics and conversations really well.
But also the fact that we were doing it together. Um, some of the most fun I ever had was with a really good purchasing team, and you could.
I could kind of see what they were trying to do and where they were going, and how they were passing the ball, and I kind of couldn't.
Some of the things that they were doing were ineffable, and something I couldn't really know.
Um, I remember working, um, one of the teams we worked with, I think, was a big, big, big company like Intel or something like that.
And they were… they were digging us on price, and… I had this sense, I could tell that they were exceptionally professional about their ability to nail somebody on price and just drive it down and drive it down.
Hey, we're Intel. We can tell you what the price is going to be, and it's going to be much lower than your cost. I'm sorry.
But they played around with this, and we were a little scrappy startup, so we… we fought valiantly, and so they had this… I had this sense of them kind of, like.
Uh, like, a tiger holding an antelope's neck in its mouth, and they were kind of playing with this.
But they didn't actually crunch down and break our neck. They kind of like, okay, we get it. You guys are so cute. We're going to pay at least your cost, maybe a little under, maybe a little bit over, but, you know, we're not going to completely screw you. We're not going to kill you.
So those are some of the most fun I had was that dual-level collaboration.
Um, another thing that we… Dave touched on a little bit with open source software.
Um, I wanted to mention, especially. Much smaller projects, sometimes even 2- or 3-person projects, but sometimes 100-person projects.
Open source software, and especially the GitForge pull request. Kind of collaboration is… is another, like.
Dramatically wonderful human thing that I've experienced that I think most people don't experience, and I want to at least kind of, like, tell it to you and give you a little taste of it.
The way it works is not unlike the sales team, you learn your position, you learn the lingo, you learn the plays.
But you learn them in your team, and then you can go to.
An away team that has… knows nothing about you. Um, except that they've learned the same kind of collaboration patterns. The lingo and the meanings of different words and how things fit together.
You can go over to their GitHub repo, or whatever. Um, and plug yourself right in.
Not like you're a team member, but like you're a full collaborator.
You're bringing a way of playing the game. You're looking at what they've built already.
You can plug yourself in without talking to them, without knowing who they are, without ever meeting them.
And accomplish meaningful work, and move the… move the product forward.
Um, without… with this very light collaboration, and literally, I've done that over and over, where I go over to a team, and I'm like.
Hey, I can move the ball down the field this way.
And they're like, wow, I didn't expect that. That's amazing. And the signaling, the coordination needed for that is, like, really light touch.
It's like, um… you know, here's… here's a feature, here's my pull request, this is what it addresses, and their thing is…
Pretty much tweak this, tweak that if you could, and then looks good to me. Lgtm is the way that you… they kind of accept a, uh… accept a pull request. And it's… it's really cool because it's a deep collaboration, and it's…
Really cool, because it's with a team that you don't even know. You don't know where they live in the world, you don't know what they like, what they don't like.
You just know that you're both working together to move this product forward. It's a… it's a wonderful and amazing thing.
Thanks.
Love that. Thank you. Um, Scott, do you mind if Stacey sneaks in before?
I don't mind, this is… I will make my comment. At the end.
All right?
Just real quickly, I just want to throw a marker down, because Doug said he wasn't sure.
Where his comment fits in. So I just want to throw a marker down, because.
We didn't talk about the notion of. You know, getting credit and ownership and property and things like that.
And I just want to say that I think what Doug touched upon is this idea of.
The environment or the work community of a group. And so at some later date, I think we should talk about that.
Because what Doug brings up is. The feel of when a group works together.
Of… that interconnectedness.
Which touches upon what Ken was. Talking about, and why everybody is there, and what brings them there. So I just wanted to…
Highlight that, for lack of a better word. Thank you.
Thanks, Stacey. Uh, Gil, quickly?
Quickly, Pete talking about moving the ball down the court, uh, took me from the metaphor of basketball to the actual game of basketball.
You know, and I'm struck that how, uh, you know, a player can be traded from one team to another and play on the new team.
There's something shared. And Kevin, it's not automated by any means, but there's shared language, syntax, ways of moving, and so forth, and yet… You still find the teams playing really different ways. The Warriors, at the peak of their game, when they went, I don't know how many championships in a row.
There was something almost telepathic and balletic about watching them play.
Sure, that was collaboration, not coordination, but anyway, that's fine. No.
Sure.
Whatever you want to call it. It was… it was ballet. I mean, you know, I think of the Brazilian… Pele was playing, there's something that is able to emerge in how people play together, like jazz, there's a common language, there's a common syntax.
There's moves that they drill. In a very regimented and maybe almost mechanistic way, like a musician learning scales that enable something to emerge.
Both individually as a musician and together in a jazz combo or an improv group or something like that.
So…
So, I just want to bring in… within the collaborations I work in, there's often.
People you're opposing, and you have to stop them doing bad things.
And that hasn't been mentioned. You know, we're working against the Tourism Development Authority.
That has this new fund set up. They get, you know, in a good year, $40 million from.
Hotel tax, and they won't pay anything for. Workforce housing, um.
For the people working in hotels. And they've got this fund set up to it, and they just make it more marketing. And so, as we do housing, we're going to have to stop them doing what they're doing with this fund that was set up.
With one goal, because what they have is. Seven hoteliers, one.
Nice, but not very smart. County Commissioner, and one citizen who no one listens to. So, I mean, a lot of collaboration. If you want to get stuff done, you have to stop bad things from happening, and you know who they are.
And we haven't talked about that at all.
Mm-hmm. Um, Scott, I think you've got the last word here, and then I'm hoping Ken has a poem for us.
You are still muted.
The last word, I'm sorry, is related to a comment that was made last call, where I brought up this idea.
Very good.
It was something like, if you don't hear things that make you feel uncomfortable.
Then your group isn't big enough. And I was thinking about that and the nature of collaboration, and if is the point.
To get more and more and more opinions. Or is there a limit to the size of a collaboration?
That actually is a collaboration. And I'll leave you with that open-ended.
But…
Thank you. Like, uh, Quaker Advices, which they do sometimes at the end of meetings. They'll have, like.
Queries or advices, which are just things to ponder. Um, Mr. Homer.
I can speak to that, Scott. There are… I spent a decade of my life developing something called the World Cafe Dialogue Process. The World Cafe Dog Process is really great for sharing meaning, it's really great for exploring possibilities, it's really great for learning and reflecting, it's terrible for courting an action.
Okay? Look at the social brain, Robin Dunbar is one of the authors, two other women from Oxford there. They talk about the Dunbar number, um.
When it comes to coordinating action, it's 5 is optimal. And if you have more than 5, then break it into groups of 5 with… break it into groups of 15 with.
People coming into that group of five to coordinate the next ring out. So, yes, there are very definite limits in coordinating action.
Unless it's incredibly clear how people are supposed to act. Um, there's a story about, um.
First Nations people in this country before the arrival of the Europeans.
They would just get a sense that things were out of balance, and so the whole… all these tribes would come together, and they'd spend days listening to each other, and they'd start with… Listen to the young people.
And they'd end with listening to the grandparents. Usually the grandmothers had the last word. And they didn't have planning notebooks, and they didn't have strategic plans, but once they'd talked for a few weeks.
They knew they were… they could put things back in balance, and they would go back into the world, and things would be in balance until the next time they felt the need.
There's another woo-woo layer of collaboration there, of knowing the field, of sensing what's going on in the field there, that.
Most of us have lost contact with. Anyway… They didn't even have whiteboards, and they didn't even have markers.
Are you saying they didn't even have whiteboards? Damn! Oh my god, no dry erase?
You know? Um, but occasionally, one warrior would write.
Somebody's name in the snow. Just so you know.
In blood or pee? Oh.
It's a song by, uh… Chet Atkins, I still write your name in the snow. It's a great tune, check it out.
Okay, I'm gonna read one of my poems. It may actually fit.
Shoot. Thanks.
Um, I call this Conspiracy of Silence. It's been quite a while since I was among people where we were all silent together.
I'm feeling a need to join with such people now. I'm feeling a need to be with people who are willing to shut up for a while.
People… to be with people who want to be quiet. People want to be still for a bit.
I'm feeling a need to be with people who want to resist the impulse to make sudden moves.
I'm feeling a need to be with people who want to spend more time and effort on understanding than they do on explaining.
And to those people, I offer this invitation and invocation. Let us come together in a silence and breathe deeply.
Let us breathe deeply until we can stand with ease inside each of us.
Let us breathe deeply until we can send with ease, connecting each other.
Let us breathe deeply until we can look into each other's eyes.
And not flinch. Let us breathe deeply until we can talk about what we see in each other's eyes.
Let us breathe deeply until we can breathe together in peace.
Let us breathe deeply until we can breathe peace into the world, and most of all.
Let us breathe deeply until we can feel the world breathe peace.
Into us.
Thank you, Ken. Thank you all. Again, next week, if anybody has a thought and wants to run the call.
Uh, let me know, and uh, thank you for another very nice OGMA exploration. Really appreciate it.
Ciao.
Thanks, everyone.
An idea is how to collaborate to oppose.
Yeah.
All right?
I like that a